# Wk01 - Recap

## Introductions

- Introduce yourself
- What did you find interesting from COMP1511
- Is there anything from COMP1511 that you felt you didn't understand fully
- Lab Partners

## What does the following do?

```c
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <assert.h>
 
int main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
	int i, j, *a;
	int N = 0;
 
	// initialisation
	assert(argc > 1);
	sscanf(argv[1], "%d", &N);
	assert(N > 0);
	a = malloc(N*sizeof(int));
	assert(a != NULL);
	for (i = 2; i < N; i++) a[i] = 1;
 
	// computation
	for (i = 2; i < N; i++) {
		if (a[i]) {
			for (j = i; i*j < N; j++) a[i*j] = 0;
		}
	}
 
	// results
	for (i = 2; i < N; i++) {
		if (a[i]) printf("%d\n",i);
	}
	exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
```

It may seem obscure at first so let's break it down into individual lines;

- What does `assert` do?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

It checks that a given condition is true, in the event that the condition is false it prints out an error than aborts the program.
</p></details>

- What happens when you don't have braces around for loop statements

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

```c
// A)
if (a) {
    b();
    c();
}

// B)
if (a)
    b();
    c();

// C)
if (a) {
    b();
}
c();
```

B) and C) are identical.  So when you don't have the braces it just takes the next statement.  Unlike Python; C does not use indentation to determine what is inside if / for loops.

This will happen for any; for, while, or if/else if/else statement without braces.

I recommend to avoid errors to either put it on a single line like;

```c
if (a) b();
c();
```

Or just always use braces.

</p>
</details>

- What does `sscanf(argv[1], "%d", &N)` do?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

`sscanf` is `scanf` but for strings, so it just scans in an integer from the first parameter (`argv[0]` is the program name remember!)

</p>
</details>

- Alternatives for `sscanf`?  There are a few...

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

For integers the following comes to mind;
- `strtol` (safer / less error prone)
- `atoi` (easiest to use but doesn't handle errors)

</p>
</details>

- For each of the asserts
  - What are they checking
  - What is a better error message that we could display

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

- `assert(argc > 1)` is checking that you have atleast one argument beside the program name
    - Probably could print out an error with the proper usage of the program (i.e. `USAGE ./sieve <N>`
- `assert(N > 0)` is asserting that the value read was an integer and was non negative
    - Probably could print out an error explaining why you can't have negative numbers
- `assert(a != NULL)` is asserting that malloc didn't return NULL (it returns NULL in cases where the allocation failed i.e. if you tried to allocate more memory that you have left)
    - This is fine in this case (we could also print out an error)
</p>
</details>

- What does `exit` do?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

It gracefully exits the program in this case (kinda of like a `return 0`) it will close file pointers / flush buffers (as opposed to abort which just straight up exits without flushing.

</p>
</details>

- What is the value of `a[0]` and `a[1]` during the execution of the program
  - Do we care?  Do they even matter?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

The value is undefined and can contain anything!  But no we don't care about what the value is since we don't try to read from it.

</p>
</details>

- What does the program produce

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

All the prime numbers up till N, Sieve of Eratosthenes

</p>
</details>

- What is Big O Notation?  i.e. `O(n)` what does that mean?  What does it tell us?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

It tells us how a particular measurement of a program performs in regards to the size of it's input.

For example if we had a simple for loop;

```c
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
    for (int j = 0; j < 10; j++) {
        // do something...
    }
}
```

Since the outer for loop scales with the number of elements we would state that the number of iterations is O(n).  The inner loop has a constant number of iterations so we would call that inner loop O(1).  Thus overall the complexity is O(n) * O(1) = O(n).  If the inner loop iterated up till 'n' we would call it O(n * m).

I'll go through some tricks next week.
</p>
</details>

## A 'real' world example!

`CPath` demonstration from [here](https://github.com/BraedonWooding/cpath).

Python is known to be very slow but here you can see that that it's actually faster than Cute Files and TinyDir which are written in C!!!!

| Test                     | User   | System | Wall   |
| ------------------------ | ------ | ------ | ------ |
| CPath (Recursion in C)   | 0.020s | 0.062s | 0.082s |
| CPath (Emplace in C)     | 0.020s | 0.063s | 0.083s |
| CPath (Recursive in cpp) | 0.020s | 0.062s | 0.082s |
| CPath (Emplace in cpp)   | 0.020s | 0.063s | 0.083s |
| find                     | 0.021s | 0.126s | 0.147s |
| Python (os.walk)         | 0.156s | 0.081s | 0.237s |
| Cute Files (C)           | 0.041s | 0.243s | 0.284s |
| TinyDir (C)              | 0.050s | 0.244s | 0.294s |
| tree                     | 0.369s | 0.256s | 0.626s |

Why?

- Look at the user time, what does that mean?
- What is system time?  What does this indicate to us?

What does this tell us!

Feel free to check out the code [here](https://github.com/BraedonWooding/cpath) but keep in consideration it is just a rough sketch and a lot of the code is prone to change as I head towards stabilisation :).

And continuing on this note let us write some bash code to generate a ridiculous amount of files!

This will help with this week's lab if you want to write some testing code!

```bash
mkdir tmp
for i in {1..9}; do
  mkdir "tmp/a$i"
  for j in {1..99}; do
    mkdir "tmp/a$i/b$j"
    for k in {1..49}; do
      touch "tmp/a$i/b$j/$k.tmp"
    done
  done
done
```

This is pretty straightforward and not examinable, knowing bash in this course is really important as it can make some automation tasks much much much easier!!!

In C using my library it'll be something like

```c
#include "cpath.h"

int main(void) {
    cpath path = cpathFromUtf8("tmp");
    cpathMkdir(&path);

    for (cpath_char_t i = 1; i < 10; i++) {
        cpathAppendSprintf(&path, "/a%d", i);
        cpathMkdir(&path);
    
        for (cpath_char_t j = 1; j < 100; j++) {
            cpathAppendSprintf(&path, "/b%d", j);
            cpathMkdir(&path);
        
            for (cpath_char_t k = 1; k < 50; k++) {
                cpathAppendSprintf(&path, "/%d.tmp", k);
                FILE *f = cpathOpen(&path, CPATH_STR("w"));
                fclose(f);
                cpathUpDir(&path);
            }
            cpathUpDir(&path);
        }
        cpathUpDir(&path);
    }
    return 0;
}
```

Can you see the similarities to the above bash example?

Want to see the time difference!

Let's run it ourselves we'll have to leave the bash program for a few minutes so we'll run the C program first.

I'm going to run these on my Mac because well the CSE servers are quite a bit slower in terms of IO with the C program taking about 6x the time so it took over 10 mins for the bash program which we don't really have to wait :).  Feel free to copy the files and run it yourself though if you want.

- Carrying on what we were talking about before what perks your interest about the time spent
  - Clearly the user time is high but what about that system time!
  
One small final note about benchmarking:
- Be really really really careful, you'll always get the benchmarks wrong the first time.  Either you'll compile with the wrong settings or write a program that is slow and claim it is the language.
- User Time + System Time != Wall Time, so just tracking how long it took your program to complete is often not a good idea.  For example if I run the program with spotify and chrome and emacs and a billion other things it takes a longer amount of time because the OS has to divide up it's resources between each program.  So NEVER trust the wall time, always aim for user time.  In some cases you care about system time but in the lab you will ONLY care about user time.

## IO

What are the following
- argc/argv

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

Argc is argument count, Argv is argument vector (which just is an array of all the arguments).  Argv is NULL terminated (kinda like a linked list) the last element is always NULL.

</p>
</details>

- stdin/stdout/stderr

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

Stdin is input to program, Stdout is output to program, Stderr is for errors.

</p>
</details>

Consider the following program

```c
// my_prog.c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
    printf("%s", argv[1]);
    putchar(getchar());
    return 0;
}
```

If we executed the following;

```bash
$ gcc my_prog.c -o my_prog
$ ./my_prog hello there, "John Shepard" < in > out
```

The file `out` contains `Hello Sailor` and the file `in` contains just the word `hey` prior the running the second command.

- What is argc and argv?
- Where does getchar take it's character from
- What is printed out to terminal and what is the contents of `out` and `in` after running the command.
- What does `>>` do compared to `>`

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

- Argc is 4, the arguments are `./my_prog`, `hello`, `there,`, `John Shepard`
- Getchar reads from the `in` file
- `in` contains just `hey` as it states but since the output is directed to the out file it'll print out nothing.  However the out file will contain `helloh` (without any newline)
- `>>` appends (adds to the end) of the file where as `>` truncates ('deletes' the text before it starts to write)
</p>
</details>

## More IO

What does each of the following do.  Note `int x;` is defined prior.

- `scanf("%d", x)`
- `scanf("%d", &x)`
- `printf("%d", x)`
- `fscanf(stdin, "%d", &x)`
- `fscanf(stderr, "%d", &x)`
- `fprintf(stdout, "%d", x)`
- `fprintf(stderr, "%d", x)`

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

1. Since `x` is an int this is invalid we must pass a pointer to scanf
2. This is valid and fine (will read an int into x)
3. Will print out x (is valid)
4. Is also valid is identical to the second one
5. You can't scanf from stderr (stderr is output)
6. Identical to 3 (valid)
7. Also valid just prints to stderr instead of stdout
</p>
</details>

## Functions

- Make a swap function that exchanges 2 elements in an array. i.e. `swap(array, i, j)` will swap `array[i]` and `array[j]`

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

We didn't get to it this week but that's okay, it's pretty simple; I'll quickly cover it next week.

```c
void swap(int *array, int i, int j) {
    int tmp = array[i];
    array[i] = array[j];
    array[j] = tmp;
}
```
</p>
</details>

Consider the following Linked List

```c
typedef struct _node_t {
    int value;
    struct _node_t *next;
} Node;

typedef Node *List;
```

- What is good about the typedefs, what is bad?  Is there any ambiguity
- Write a function to sum up the list using while, for, and then recursive

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
<p>

The typedefs are great for making names clearer and easier to write but they can add ambiguity with pointers (it's hard to tell what is a pointer and what isn't).
</p>
</details>

Coding solutions [here](https://github.com/BraedonWooding/Comp2521-T1-2020/tree/master/Tute1_Files)!

## Final Stuff

Make sure you are comfortable with:

- Structs
- Pointers
- Malloc
- Linked Lists
